# MSK-Tumor-Heterogeneity-Investigation
Summer Project at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center "Investigating Tumor Heterogeneity Across Space and Time"


Background: Genomic diversity across cancer cells is crucial for disease progression and treatment response, yet limited availability of patients with multiple profiled samples has impeded the investigation of tumor heterogeneity. The MSK-IMPACT clinical cohort, comprising over 12,000 patients with multiple sequenced samples, includes longitudinal sampling of the same tumor location at different time points and multiregional sampling of primary and metastatic disease. This enables a unique analysis of tumor heterogeneity in time and space across different cancer types.
Methods: We analyzed 65,523 patients with MSK-IMPACT sequencing; 12,144 (18.5%) had >1 sequenced sample. Samples with >20% purity were included to avoid confounding by low purity. Sample pairs encompassed two primaries, two metastases, or a primary-metastasis. Pairs were categorized as “synchronous” (acquired within 90 days) and "asynchronous" (acquired >120 days apart). Tumor Mutational Burden (TMB) is the number of non-synonymous mutations per sequenced megabase and Fraction of Genome Altered (FGA) is the proportion of the sequenced genome affected by copy number changes. We identified somatic alterations in individual genes (mutations, copy number changes, fusions) and used the OncoKB knowledgebase for driver distinction. Spearman correlation assessed time-related TMB/FGA differences in asynchronous samples. Wilcoxon rank-sum test compared TMB/FGA in synchronous primary-metastatic samples. Jaccard index quantified sample similarity. P-values were Bonferroni-corrected for multiple hypothesis testing.
Results: We identified seven cancer types with >50 patients possessing a primary-metastasis pair (lung, breast, prostate, bladder, colorectal, sarcoma, glioma). Time between sample acquisition impacted TMB for pairs of primary prostate, metastatic lung, and primary/metastatic bladder asynchronous samples, while FGA association was only significant in primary/metastatic prostate asynchronous samples. No significant differences in TMB/FGA were observed in primary/metastatic synchronous samples across all cancer types, but limited sample sizes affected statistical power. Synchronous pairs generally exhibited higher genomic similarity at the gene level than asynchronous pairs, except in lung adenocarcinoma.
Conclusion: This study highlights the complexities in tumors’ genomic landscapes over time and across regions, offering insights into mutational load, chromosomal instability, and somatic alterations during cancer progression. Our results can help to inform selection of tumor location and frequency of sampling for clinical sequencing.
